it was one of the costliest corporate
scandals of all time one that left a
venerable brand in tatters a scandal
that allowed one of the biggest
companies in the world to claim esg
credentials while still polluting the
atmosphere
it's a scandal that still haunts the
automotive industry to this day and it's
what i'll be covering in this video so
don't go anywhere
[Music]
before we switch on the ignition we need
a disclaimer to aid your cognition
giving financial advice isn't part of my
mission education and entertainment are
my only emissions
so contact a financial advisor if your
finances look fishy
to those who only just stumbled into
this place please try not to be put off
by this face my name is guy and here at
the coin bureau is where i reside
my team and i provide you with the best
crypto and related content that money
can't buy
that's right no adverts or sponsored
shout outs to endure just a whole lot of
knowledge unsullied and pure if that
sounds like something that's up your
avenue hit subscribe and the bell icon
so you'll know when the next video's due
okay now that's all done and dusted
let's find out which naughty company got
itself busted
the volkswagen emissions scandal
sometimes known as dieselgate or
emissionsgate dates back to september
2015 when the united states
environmental protection agency epa
issued a notice of violation of the
clean air act to german carmaker
volkswagen
the agency had found that volkswagen had
intentionally programmed turbocharged
direct injection tdi diesel engines to
only activate their emissions controls
during laboratory testing
vw admitted to installing what are
called defeat devices in millions of its
diesel-powered cars
this saw technical software detect when
cars were being tested for compliance
with emissions rules
this software then adjusted the
diesel-powered engines so that they
passed the compliance tests
however in normal use it was discovered
that these engines emitted far more
pollution including up to 40 times more
nitrogen dioxide than the permitted
levels
and this had all been going on for years
now to this day it's still largely
unknown how many employees and
executives knew about these defeat
devices what they were doing and why
but what's even more staggering is that
vw which had always positioned itself in
the minds of automotive aficionados as
one of the most advanced and
cutting-edge vehicle producers deployed
this emissions cheating software in
about 11 million cars worldwide
including 500 000 in the us in model
years 2009 through to 2015.
now if you're wondering how the heck
volkswagen managed to get away
undetected with its pollution scheme for
so many years and how it was finally
caught by regulators
well here's some background for you
now in 2014 the california air resources
board or carb commissioned from the
international council on clean
transportation icct
a study on emissions discrepancies
between european and u.s models of
vehicles summing up the data on 15
vehicles from three different sources
among those recruited for this task was
a group of five scientists at the west
virginia university center for
alternative fuels engines and emissions
these five scientists used a japanese
onboard emission test system and
detected additional emissions during
live road tests on two out of three
diesel cars
the icct furthermore purchased data from
two other sources
the data-driven outcome induced
international regulators to investigate
volkswagen which subsequently caused its
stock price to fall in value by a third
in the days immediately after the news
broke
the combination of bad news partnered
with the growing concerns regarding the
potential wrongdoing within the
volkswagen organization led vw group ceo
martin vintercorn to resign
on top of that the head of brand
development at volkswagen heinz jacob
neuser audi research and development
head ulrich huckenberg and porsche
research and development head wolfgang
hats were also suspended
in light of the allegations in april
2016 volkswagen announced plans to spend
16.2 billion euros on rectifying the
emissions issues and planned to refit
the affected vehicles as part of a
recall campaign
but then in january 2017 volkswagen
pleaded guilty to criminal charges and
signed an agreed statement of facts
which drew on the results of an
investigation volkswagen had itself
commissioned from u.s lawyers
the statement set out how engineers had
developed and built the defeat devices
because diesel models could not pass u.s
emissions tests without them and
deliberately sought to conceal their use
consequently in april 2017 a u.s federal
judge ordered volkswagen to pay a
whopping 2.8 billion dollar criminal
fine for quote rigging diesel-powered
vehicles to cheat on government
emissions tests
subsequently ex-ceo vintacorn was
charged in the united states with fraud
and conspiracy on the 3rd of may 2018
but what's even more staggering about
this is that as of june 2020 the scandal
had cost the german manufacturer up to
33.3 billion
due to fines penalties financial
settlements and buyback costs
at present various government and civil
actions are ongoing in the u.s and the
european union where most of the
affected vehicles are located
while these vehicles remain legal to
drive in the eu consumer groups and
governments have sought to make sure
that vw has compensated owners
appropriately as it has had to do in the
us
now the scandal raised awareness over
the higher levels of pollution emitted
by the vast majority of diesel-powered
engines from a wide range of car
manufacturers which under real-world
driving conditions exceeded legal
emission limits
for instance a study conducted by the
adac the largest european motoring
organization showed the largest
emissions deviations from producers like
volvo renault jeep hyundai citron and
feared which naturally resulted in
investigations opening into other diesel
emissions scandals
on that note a discussion was sparked on
the topic of software controlled
machinery being generally prone to
cheating with a possible way out of this
system entailing the open sourcing of
the software for public scrutiny
and with that it's time to get a bit
technical so here's the science bit
concentrate
the 1980s saw the development of
three-way catalytic converter technology
which was very effective at reducing
nitrogen dioxide in petrol engine
exhaust
however it did not work well for diesel
vehicles as unless treated these emit 20
times more nitrogen dioxide than petrol
engines
to deal with this dysfunctionality in
2005 a number of managers at volkswagen
intended to purchase the rights to
mercedes's bulky expensive and high
maintenance treatment system called
blu-tec for reducing diesel exhaust
pollution
other vw managers rejected blue tech and
preferred to develop their own cheaper
solution called lnt
the lnt team won
but surprise surprise their solution
didn't actually work
now i will say that overall abiding by
technical compliance in the automotive
industry has often proven to be
incredibly hard
for instance since 2016 38 out of 40
diesel cars of all brands tested by adac
reportedly failed a no nitrogen dioxide
test based on government standards
nonetheless vw promoted and marketed
what seemed to be the technological
miracle of fast cheap consumer-friendly
green diesel vehicles
on paper that is in reality the system
failed to combine low fuel consumption
with compliant nitrogen dioxide
emissions and in 2006 vw actively chose
to program its engine control units to
switch from lower fuel consumption and
high emissions to low emission compliant
mode when an emissions test was detected
essentially this led volkswagen-designed
engines to emit nitrogen dioxide levels
well above the permitted limit in daily
operation and to comply with the u.s
nitrogen dioxide standards when being
tested thereby constituting what is
commonly referred to as a defeat device
in fact in 2015 the german news magazine
de spiegel reported that at least 30
people at management level in vw had
known about the deceit for years of
course vw denied these allegations
entirely
now starting in the 2009 model year the
volkswagen group reportedly began
migrating its diesel engines to a common
rail fuel injection system
in technical terms this system allows
for higher precision fuel delivery which
theoretically leads to better fuel
processing and by default to better
emissions control
since 2009 vw has described its diesel
engines as being as clean as if not
cleaner than the us and californian
requirements while providing good fuel
economy and exceptional performance
and what's especially curious about this
is that due to the apparently efficient
fuel economy provided by its diesel
engines in 2014 vw was registered with
an impressive corporate average fuel
economy rate
the seemingly low emission levels of
vw's vehicles tested with the defeat
device in operation
enabled the company to receive green car
subsidies and even tax exemptions in the
united states
okay so volkswagen's engines were now
deemed green and environmentally
friendly but how were these alleged
emissions discrepancies discovered by
analysts testers and regulators well
let's have a look shall we
now in 2014 a group of scientists at
west virginia university submitted a
proposal to the international council on
clean transportation
and the co-lead of the us branch of icct
john german awarded the student group a
50 000 grant for a study to conduct
tests on three diesel cars
namely a volkswagen passat a volkswagen
jetta and a bmw x5 the icct also
purchased data from emissions analytics
a uk-based emissions consulting firm to
gain an additional more rounded estimate
on the study
now in early 2014 two professors and two
students from west virginia university
began measuring and testing emissions
from the three vehicles under real-world
road conditions
these three vehicles were all
individually certified at a california
air resources board facility before the
tests as falling below the emissions
limits when using the standard
laboratory testing protocols pretty
smooth right
well not so fast
the researchers drove the volkswagen
passat from los angeles to seattle and
back again covering most of the u.s west
coast and testing the passat's emissions
over 2000 miles
with regards to the bmw x5 the
researchers found that the vehicle was
at or below the standard permitted
emissions rate
but under real driving conditions they
found the volkswagen jetta greatly
exceeded the us's emissions limit by a
factor of 15 to 35 whereas the passat
exceeded the allowed levels by a factor
of 5 to 20.
that is quite a discrepancy between the
lab-based tests and those executed in
real-world conditions
clearly the emissions thoroughly
exceeded legal limits set by both
european and u.s standards
thus john german while analyzing the
apparent deceit initially argued that it
required a lot more effort than simply
adding some code to the engine software
as the code would have inevitably been
validated by the analysts and
researchers
however the research scientists did not
identify the defeat device itself in the
passat and jetta models they did however
report their findings in a study they
presented to the california air
resources board in may 2014
that same month colorado's rapid screen
real-world emissions test data once
again reinforced the allegations of
volkswagen's suspected abnormally high
emissions levels and after a year-long
investigation concerning the internal
mechanisms of the vw's engines an
international team of investigators
identified the defeat device as a piece
of code labeled acoustic condition which
activated emissions curbing systems when
the car's computer identified it was
undergoing a test
perhaps a bit too sophisticated a
functionality for a standard acoustic
condition device don't you think
of course the data-driven findings by
researchers and investigators led to the
u.s environmental protection agency
filing a notice of violation against the
german car manufacturer on the 18th of
september 2015. the epa thus served a
notice of violation on the volkswagen
group alleging that approximately 480
000 volkswagen and audi cars equipped
with 2-liter tdi engines and sold in the
u.s between 2009 and 2015 had an
emissions compliance defeat device
installed
now according to the epa the defeat
device used by volkswagen detected the
position of the steering wheel the
vehicle's speed the duration of the
engine's mechanical operation and its
barometric pressure
but what was particularly ingenious
about this entire process was that the
criteria written into the underlying
structure of the defeat devices
very closely matched the epa's required
emissions testing protocol which allowed
the vehicle to comply with emissions
regulations by properly activating all
emission controls during testing
criminally clever you might say
but the epa's noticed a violation
alleged that under normal driving
conditions the software suppressed the
emissions controls allowing for better
fuel economy at the expense of emitting
up to 40 times more nitrogen dioxide
than allowed by law
according to the epa volkswagen had
insisted for over a year before the
outbreak of the scandal that the
emissions discrepancies were mere
technical glitches
but when confronted with official
evidence on the use of defeat devices
volkswagen fully acknowledged that it
had manipulated the tests
now the first sign that volkswagen was
ready to come clean reportedly came on
the 21st of august 2015 at a conference
on green transportation at pacific grove
california where an unnamed company
representative approached christopher
grundler director of the epa office of
transportation and air quality and
surprised him by informally admitting
that the company had been deceiving
regulators
and a california air resources board
official apparently was standing next to
grundler at the time
but formal acknowledgement of the
deception was made by volkswagen
executives in germany and the united
states to epa and california officials
during a conference call in september
2015. during which volkswagen executives
discussed written materials provided to
the participants which showed how
volkswagen's diesel engine software
circumvented u.s emissions tests
that admission came after the epa
threatened to withhold approval for the
company's 2016 volkswagen and audi
diesel models
volkswagen consequently announced that
11 million of its manufactured cars had
been involved in falsified emissions
reports and that over 7 billion dollars
would be ultimately earmarked to deal
with the costs of rectifying the
software at the heart of the scandal
in light of this in november 2015
volkswagen officially announced that in
addition to the two thousand dollars it
was offering current vw owners for
trade-ins of their
non-emissions-compliant cars
482 000 diesel audi and volkswagen
owners in the united states would be
eligible to receive 1 000
in vouchers
following its admission and recall plans
in the united states volkswagen also
began to establish similar plans in the
european union where it was estimated
that 8.5 million of the 11 million
diesel-powered vehicles affected by the
scandal were located
in fact in 2018 the european union
warned volkswagen that it did not
believe that it was moving fast enough
to issue repairs on recalled cars
provide consumers with appropriate
information on what steps vw was doing
to resolve the problem and what
compensation it was offering affected
consumers in light of this volkswagen
agreed to pay a 1 billion euro fine
imposed by germany for failing to
monitor the employees that modified the
software behind the emissions scandal
but folks it gets worse
in germany over 60 000 civil lawsuits of
various degrees representing about 450
000 citizens were filed from 2015
through to 2019 by vw owners seeking
similar compensation to what volkswagen
had awarded drivers in the us
and a case led by the federation of
german consumer organizations was also
brought against volkswagen
at the higher regional court volkswagen
argued that while the united states had
banned the affected cars no eu member
state had done so and thus there was no
basis for compensation
however judge michael nayef rejected a
summary judgment for volkswagen in
september 2019 allowing what was
anticipated to be a multi-year case to
go forward
in february 2020 volkswagen had settled
with the federation of german consumer
organizations for approximately 830
million euros providing between 1.3 and
6.2 000 euros to roughly 260 000
volkswagen owners
as was to be expected many consumers
were deeply angered by this settlement
as it thoroughly undermined the
compensation structure that affected
volkswagen drivers had previously
received in the u.s
a civil suit filed by one vw driver
managed to reach the federal court of
justice germany's supreme court and in
may 2020 the supreme court ruled that
the consumer was entitled to a
compensation package entailing the full
market value of the car which was
several times larger than what the
settlement would have originally offered
however it still remains unclear how
much volkswagen will effectively owe as
a result of the civil lawsuits
a similar class action lawsuit against
volkswagen representing more than 91 000
owners is currently underway in the uk
seeking greater compensation for being
sold vehicles known by volkswagen to be
defective
in april 2020 the high court of justice
gave its preliminary findings stating
that there was a likelihood that
volkswagen sold cars with a defeat
device installed and thus allowing the
trial to go forward now setting monetary
compensation structures aside for a
second perhaps the most harrowing
component of this scandal is the impact
that vehicles with built-in non-emission
compliant defeat devices are having on
the environment
the consequences of producing
diesel-powered vehicles that do not
respect international legal limits in
terms of pollution are dire
for instance a peer-reviewed study
published in environmental research
letters estimated that approximately 59
premature deaths will be caused by the
excess pollution generated between 2008
and 2015 by vehicles equipped with the
defeat device in the united states
the study completed in 2015 also found
that making these vehicles emissions
compliant by the start of 2016 would
avert an additional
130 early deaths
earlier peer-reviewed studies quoted
estimates ranging from 10 to 350 excess
deaths in the united states related to
the defeat devices
but perhaps most harrowing of all was a
study completed in 2022 in which
economists argued that every cheating
volkswagen car in every 1000 cars on the
road caused a 1.7 increase in infant
mortality
on top of this on a global scale
vehicles that do not comply with
international pollution standards
release an excessive amount of nitrogen
dioxide which consequently leads to
higher levels of smog and acid rain
what these studies show is that the cars
carrying the defeat devices were not
only bad for the environment but took a
toll on human life as well
food for thought for all you vw
aficionados out there
so with that in mind let's see how all
of this affected volkswagen shall we
on the 21st of september 2015 the first
day of trading after the epa's notice of
violation to volkswagen became public
the share price of volkswagen ag fell by
a whopping 20 on the frankfurt stock
exchange
the next day the stock fell by another
12 dropping below 100 euros to record a
four-year low before regaining some lost
ground
share prices of other german automakers
were also affected with bmw down 4.9
percent and daimler down 5.8 percent
as a result of plummeting share prices
qatar one of the biggest volkswagen
shareholders with a 17 stake in the
company lost nearly 5 billion
as the company's stock value fell
this market volatility was also
reflected in the sales performance of
volkswagen vehicles pointing towards a
staggering 24 decline in sales in the us
surprisingly in the uk the scandal did
not affect sales which actually
increased in 2016 to an all-time high
placing volkswagen second in the league
of best-selling cars
not a great reflection on us brits
really
moreover documents obtained by cee bank
watch network provided details for the
european investment bank eib statement
that its loans to volkswagen may have
been connected to the car makers use of
cheating devices to rig emissions tests
in fact during the bank's annual press
conference on the 14th of january 2016
its president verna hoya admitted that
the 400 million euro loan might have
been used in the creation of the
emissions defeat device
at that time many redacted documents
obtained by bankwatch along with the eib
not entirely disclosing the details of
its loan hinted towards the bank
possibly already knowing that there were
some discrepancies with the internal
mechanisms of volkswagen's diesel
engines
however in 2017 the european anti-fraud
office olaf
found that volkswagen had in fact misled
the bank about its use of emissions
cheating software
now as you can imagine the volkswagen
scandal did not go down well in the
media reuters argued that the crisis at
volkswagen could have been a bigger
threat to the german economy than the
consequences of the greek sovereign debt
crisis of 2015.
deutsche weller a german state
broadcaster stated that quote a lawsuit
tsunami was headed for volkswagen at the
time with the scandal tarnishing the
volkswagen brand and the image of
germany by extension this was a case of
wide scale cynical deceit and volkswagen
is still paying the price for its
actions to this day
and the company's logic in all of this
is also incredibly difficult to
understand
rather than seek to produce more
environmentally friendly cars it instead
opted to cheat its way past regulators
and cynically maximize profits as a
result it ended up having to part with
billions in fines and compensation deals
money which could have been better spent
actually lowering the emissions of its
vehicles
it just goes to show that even the most
well-respected and well-established
international companies aren't above
shady practices in the name of profit
well i hope you enjoyed that one folks
but i would love your feedback on this
video so what do you think about the
volkswagen defeat devices is this the
biggest scandal ever in the automotive
industry
fire those thoughts down below
remember to subscribe to the channel and
ping that notification bell if you would
like to keep getting the highest quality
crypto content on the scene
make sure you also check out the coin
bureau clips channel to get all the
information you need on emergency crypto
market moves
i'll see you very soon but until then i
can be found on tick tock telegram
instagram and twitter subscribing to my
weekly newsletter will make your crypto
life supremely better because it's
packed with all the tips and tricks that
will make your gains stick you may also
want to check out my deals page it's got
some of the best crypto deals and promos
on the market today
thank you so much for watching folks and
i'll see you all very soon my name is
guy and you have been watching the coin
bureau
[Music]
you